README.md, before:

# About this branch

This branch is experimental. It rewrites the reasoner, with 2 major changes:
1. **It uses only actors, as opposed to a mix of actors & streams.**
   * Roughly, one actor maps to one 'goal'. The messages remain small - Only the size of the answer being carried.
2. **The 'monitor' has been replaced with a local termination algorithm.** 
   * The monitor was an actor which constructed a copy of the reasoner graph and counted active nodes + in-flight messages in each 'subgraph'.
   This means it had to be informed of every node, dependency and message.
   * The new algorithm is based on the spanning tree approaches to termination in message-passing systems. It achieves 'incremental completion', as it is able to determine the completion of a 'strongly connected component' (SCC) - the unit of termination. This was partially inspired by the incremental-termination of XSB's SLG-WAM.


### Test status
When this readme was written, all 'reasoning' tests were passing, however the recursive verification of explanations were failing due to discrepancies in how the reasoner & the forward chaining oracle decide what is and isn't explainable.
- `ValuePredicateTest` : fails because the oracle treats multiple `$x == $y` statements different (whether they have explanations or not).
- `VariableRolesTest` & `SchemaQueriesTest`: When a concludable has a type-variable, say `($r: $p) isa my-relation` The oracle does not seem to consider any answer with `$r` to be unified with a supertype of the concrete role-type to be explainable.

### Roadmap
The rewrite is a significant simplifcation over the existing reasoner, and makes experimentation & new features much easier to implement. Some of the bigger ones are:
#### Factorise conjunctions:
Because we currently evaluate conjunctions by splitting it recursively into subconjunctions, we effectively materialise the whole joined table - We have a row in the root node of the conjunction which stores the answers to the whole conjunction. 
Though we try to [minimize the size of the intermediate tables](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/pull/6826/files), we can do much better in memory use by storing only the factorised tables (i.e., the answer to each atom) and join them on demand.

### True reactiveness
The previous reasoner would effectively do a BFS when looking for answers. The parallelism was unbounded and there was no way to apply backpressure to it.
There is a 'pull' mechanism implemented in this rewrite, but I have not bothered to make it any different to the BFS in the previous reasoner.
How we pull determines our parallelism model and our search strategy.

#### Subqueries & aggregates
Because we now have incremental termination, we can get subqueries for free. 
This allows stratified aggregates in rules (stratified to prevent an aggregate from feeding into itself).  

---

---
## The remainder of this file is the original TypeDB readme.

---

---

[![TypeDB](./docs/banner.png)](https://typedb.com/introduction)

[![Factory](https://factory.vaticle.com/api/status/vaticle/typedb/badge.svg)](https://factory.vaticle.com/vaticle/typedb)
[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/vaticle/typedb/tree/master.svg?style=shield)](https://circleci.com/gh/vaticle/typedb/tree/master)
[![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/vaticle/typedb.svg)](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/releases/latest)
[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/discord/665254494820368395?color=7389D8&label=chat&logo=discord&logoColor=ffffff)](https://typedb.com/discord)
[![Discussion Forum](https://img.shields.io/badge/discourse-forum-blue.svg)](https://forum.typedb.com)
[![Stack Overflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/stackoverflow-typedb-796de3.svg)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/typedb)
[![Stack Overflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/stackoverflow-typeql-3dce8c.svg)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/typeql)
[![Hosted By: Cloudsmith](https://img.shields.io/badge/OSS%20hosting%20by-cloudsmith-blue?logo=cloudsmith&style=flat)](https://cloudsmith.com)

# Introducing TypeDB

TypeDB is a general-purpose database designed with a new kind of high-level, declarative query language that drastically simplifies handling complex data and logic. TypeDB is built for the performance, maintainability, safety, and scalability needs of modern applications, and is specifically tailored to cloud-based development.

- Get started by [installing TypeDB](https://typedb.com/docs/home/install/overview).
- Explore the basics of TypeDB in our easy [Crash Course](https://typedb.com/docs/home/crash-course).
- Discover more of TypeDB’s unique [features](https://typedb.com/features).
- Master TypeDB with our end-to-end [Learning Course](https://typedb.com/docs/learn/overview).
- Learn more at TypeDB's [Learning Center](https://typedb.com/learn).

> **IMPORTANT NOTE:** TypeDB & TypeQL are in the process of being rewritten in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org). There will be significant refinement to the language, and minor breaks in backwards compatibility. Learn about the changes on our [roadmap issue on GitHub](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/issues/6764). The biggest change to TypeDB 3.0 will be our storage data structure and architecture that significantly boosts performance. We’re aiming to release 3.0 in the summer this year, along with preliminary benchmarks of TypeDB.

## Polymorphic databases

###  Why TypeDB was built

Data frequently exhibits polymorphic features in the form of inheritance hierarchies and interface dependencies. TypeDB was crafted to solve the inability of current database paradigms to natively express these polymorphic features.

- Relational schemas have [no native capability for modeling polymorphic data](https://typedb.com/philosophy#why-do-we-need-a-polymorphic-database).
- Unstructured databases eliminate the schemas entirely, but this [prevents declarative data retrieval](https://typedb.com/philosophy#why-do-we-need-a-polymorphic-database).
- [ORMs work around the fundamental problem](https://typedb.com/philosophy#why-do-we-need-a-polymorphic-database) by trading off performance.


### Providing full support for polymorphism

<!-- Polymorphism in programming languages and data modeling comes in the form of [interface](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database), [inheritance](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database), and [parametric polymorphism](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database).  -->

In order to fully support polymorphism, a database needs to implement three key components:

- Support for [**polymorphic** **schemas**](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) that can express inheritance hierarchies and interface implementations.
- Implementation of a fully [**variablizable** **query language**](https://typedb.com/features#polymorphic-queries) to support powerful [parametric](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database) database operations.
- Integration of an [**inference engine**](https://typedb.com/features#strong-type-system) to interpret variables in the semantic context given by the schema.



## The TypeDB database

### The schema

TypeDB schemas are based on a modern type system that natively supports inheritance and interfaces, and follows a [conceptual data modeling](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) approach, in which user-defined types subtype (based on their function) three root types: [entities](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling), [relations](https://typedb.com/features#expressive-relations), and [attributes](https://typedb.com/features#intuitive-attributes).

- *Entities* are independent objects,
- *Relations* depend on their *role* interfaces played by either entities or relations,
- *Attributes* are properties with a value that can be *owned* by entities or relations.

Interface and inheritance for these types can be combined in many ways, resulting in highly expressive ways of modeling data.

```php
define

full-name sub attribute, value string;
id sub attribute, value string;
email sub id;
employee-id sub id;

user sub entity,
    owns full-name,
    owns email @unique,
    plays mentorship:trainee;
employee sub user,
    owns employee-id @key,
    plays mentorship:mentor;

mentorship sub relation,
    relates mentor,
    relates trainee;
```


### The query language

The query language of TypeDB is [TypeQL](https://typedb.com/docs/typeql/overview). The syntax of TypeQL is fully variablizable and provides native support for polymorphic queries. The language is based on [fully declarative and composable](https://typedb.com/features#modern-language) patterns, mirroring the structure of natural language.

```php
match $user isa user,
    has full-name $name,
    has email $email;
# This returns all users of any type

match $user isa employee,
    has full-name $name,
    has email $email,
    has employee-id $id;
# This returns only users who are employees

match $user-type sub user;
$user isa $user-type,
    has full-name $name,
    has email $email;
# This returns all users and their type
```


### The inference engine

Any query in TypeDB is [semantically validated](https://typedb.com/features#strong-type-system) by TypeDB’s inference engine for consistency with the database schema. This prevents invalid schema updates and data inserts before they can affect the integrity of the database.

TypeDB can also work with data that is not physically stored in the database, but instead logically inferred based on user-specified [rules](https://typedb.com/features#symbolic-reasoning). This enables developers to cleanly separate their source data from their application logic, often allowing for complex systems to be described by combinations of simple rules.

```php
define
rule transitive-team-membership:
    when {
        (team: $team-1, member: $team-2) isa team-membership;
        (team: $team-2, member: $member) isa team-membership;
    } then {
        (team: $team-1, member: $member) isa team-membership;
    };

insert
$john isa user, has email "john@vaticle.com";
$eng isa team, has name "Engineering ";
$cloud isa team, has name "Cloud";
(team: $eng, member: $cloud) isa team-membership;
(team: $cloud, member: $john) isa team-membership;

match
$john isa user, has email "john@vaticle.com";
(team: $team, member: $john) isa team-membership;
# This will return both Cloud and Engineering for $team due to the defined rule
```
 

## Effective database engineering

TypeDB breaks down the patchwork of existing database paradigms into three fundamental ingredients: [types](https://typedb.com/features#strong-type-system), [inheritance](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling), and [interfaces](https://typedb.com/features#polymorphic-queries). This provides a unified way of working with data across all database applications, that directly impacts development:

- Make use of full [object model parity](https://typedb.com/#solve-object-relational-mismatch-entirely-within-the-database) when working with OOP
- Ensure [continuous extensibility](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) of your data model
- Work with high-level [logical abstractions](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) eliminating the need for physical data modeling
- Let TypeDB's inference engine guarantee [data-consistency](https://typedb.com/#avoid-data-redundancy-and-ensure-data-consistency-in-real-time) at all times
- Write high-clarity code with TypeQL's [near-natural](https://typedb.com/features#modern-language) queries even for the most complex databases
- Unleash the power of [fully declarative and composable](https://typedb.com/features#modern-language) patterns onto your data


## Installation and editions

### TypeDB editions

* [TypeDB Cloud](https://cloud.typedb.com) — multi-cloud DBaaS
* [TypeDB Cloud self-hosted](mailto://sales@vaticle.com) — allows you to deploy TypeDB Cloud in your own environment
* **TypeDB Core** — Open-source edition of TypeDB ← _This repository_

For a comparison of all three editions, see the [Deploy](https://typedb.com/deploy) page on our website.


### Download and run TypeDB Core

You can download TypeDB from the [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/releases). 

Check our [Installation guide](https://typedb.com/docs/typedb/2.x/installation) to get started.


### Compiling TypeDB Core from source

> Note: You DO NOT NEED to compile TypeDB from the source if you just want to use TypeDB. See the _"Download and Run 
> TypeDB Core"_ section above.

1. Make sure you have the following dependencies installed on your machine:
   - Java JDK 11 or higher
   - [Bazel 6 or higher](https://bazel.build/install).

2. You can build TypeDB with either one of the following commands, depending on the targeted architecture and 
   Operation system: 

   ```sh
   $ bazel build //:assemble-linux-x86_64-targz
   $ bazel build //:assemble-linux-arm64-targz
   $ bazel build //:assemble-mac-x86_64-zip
   $ bazel build //:assemble-mac-arm64-zip
   $ bazel build //:assemble-windows-x86_64-zip
   ```

   Outputs to: `bazel-bin/`.

3. If you're on a Mac and would like to run any `bazel test` commands, you will need to install:
   - snappy: `brew install snappy`
   - jemalloc: `brew install jemalloc`


## Resources

### Developer resources

- Documentation: https://typedb.com/docs
- Discussion Forum: https://forum.typedb.com/
- Discord Chat Server: https://typedb.com/discord
- Community Projects: https://github.com/typedb-osi


### Useful links

If you want to begin your journey with TypeDB, you can explore the following resources:

* More on TypeDB's [features](https://typedb.com/features)
* In-depth dive into TypeDB's [philosophy](https://typedb.com/philosophy)
* Our [TypeDB quickstart](https://typedb.com/docs/home/quickstart)
* [TypeDB in 25 queries](https://typedb.com/docs/home/25-queries)
* **[TypeQL](https://github.com/vaticle/typeql)**
* **[TypeDB Studio](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb-studio)**


## Contributions

TypeDB and TypeQL are built using various open-source frameworks and technologies throughout its evolution. 
Today TypeDB and TypeQL use
[Speedb](https://www.speedb.io/),
[pest](https://pest.rs/),
[SCIP](https://www.scipopt.org),
[Bazel](https://bazel.build),
[gRPC](https://grpc.io),
[ZeroMQ](https://zeromq.org), 
and [Caffeine](https://github.com/ben-manes/caffeine). 

Thank you!

In the past, TypeDB was enabled by various open-source products and communities that we are hugely thankful to:
[RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org),
[ANTLR](https://www.antlr.org),
[Apache Cassandra](http://cassandra.apache.org), 
[Apache Hadoop](https://hadoop.apache.org), 
[Apache Spark](http://spark.apache.org), 
[Apache TinkerPop](http://tinkerpop.apache.org), 
and [JanusGraph](http://janusgraph.org). 

### Package hosting
Package repository hosting is graciously provided by  [Cloudsmith](https://cloudsmith.com).
Cloudsmith is the only fully hosted, cloud-native, universal package management solution, that
enables your organization to create, store and share packages in any format, to any place, with total
confidence.

## Licensing

This software is developed by [Vaticle](https://vaticle.com/).  
It's released under the Mozilla Public License 2.0 (MPL 2.0).
For license information, please see [LICENSE](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/blob/master/LICENSE). 

Vaticle also provides a commercial license for TypeDB Cloud self-hosted - get in touch with our team at 
[commercial@vaticle.com](emailto://sales@vaticle.com).

Copyright (C) 2023 Vaticle.

Commit message:

Push synchronisataion in materialisation deep into materialiser

README.md, after:

# About this branch

This branch is experimental. It rewrites the reasoner, with 3 major changes:
1. **It uses only actors, as opposed to a mix of actors & streams.**
   * Roughly, one actor maps to one 'goal'. The messages remain small - Only the size of the answer being carried.
2. **The 'monitor' has been replaced with a local termination algorithm.** 
   * The monitor was an actor which constructed a copy of the reasoner graph and counted active nodes + in-flight messages in each 'subgraph'.
   This means it had to be informed of every node, dependency and message.
   * The new algorithm is based on the spanning tree approaches to termination in message-passing systems. It achieves 'incremental completion', as it is able to determine the completion of a 'strongly connected component' (SCC) - the unit of termination. This was partially inspired by the incremental-termination of XSB's SLG-WAM.
3. We introduce a flag in Materliaser called `RELAXED_RELATION_INFERENCE_SEMANTICS` which skips the lookup and will insert a new relation into the database even if a persisted relation which subsumes it already exists.
   - I did not enable it at the time of writing this readme, but it's worth checking.

### Test status
When this readme was written, all 'reasoning' tests were passing, however the recursive verification of explanations were failing due to discrepancies in how the reasoner & the forward chaining oracle decide what is and isn't explainable.
- `ValuePredicateTest` : fails because the oracle treats multiple `$x == $y` statements different (whether they have explanations or not).
- `VariableRolesTest` & `SchemaQueriesTest`: When a concludable has a type-variable, say `($r: $p) isa my-relation` The oracle does not seem to consider any answer with `$r` to be unified with a supertype of the concrete role-type to be explainable.

### Roadmap
The rewrite is a significant simplifcation over the existing reasoner, and makes experimentation & new features much easier to implement. Some of the bigger ones are:
#### Factorise conjunctions:
Because we currently evaluate conjunctions by splitting it recursively into subconjunctions, we effectively materialise the whole joined table - We have a row in the root node of the conjunction which stores the answers to the whole conjunction. 
Though we try to [minimize the size of the intermediate tables](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/pull/6826/files), we can do much better in memory use by storing only the factorised tables (i.e., the answer to each atom) and join them on demand.

### True reactiveness
The previous reasoner would effectively do a BFS when looking for answers. The parallelism was unbounded and there was no way to apply backpressure to it.
There is a 'pull' mechanism implemented in this rewrite, but I have not bothered to make it any different to the BFS in the previous reasoner.
How we pull determines our parallelism model and our search strategy.

#### Subqueries & aggregates
Because we now have incremental termination, we can get subqueries for free. 
This allows stratified aggregates in rules (stratified to prevent an aggregate from feeding into itself).  

---

---
## The remainder of this file is the original TypeDB readme.

---

---

[![TypeDB](./docs/banner.png)](https://typedb.com/introduction)

[![Factory](https://factory.vaticle.com/api/status/vaticle/typedb/badge.svg)](https://factory.vaticle.com/vaticle/typedb)
[![CircleCI](https://circleci.com/gh/vaticle/typedb/tree/master.svg?style=shield)](https://circleci.com/gh/vaticle/typedb/tree/master)
[![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/vaticle/typedb.svg)](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/releases/latest)
[![Discord](https://img.shields.io/discord/665254494820368395?color=7389D8&label=chat&logo=discord&logoColor=ffffff)](https://typedb.com/discord)
[![Discussion Forum](https://img.shields.io/badge/discourse-forum-blue.svg)](https://forum.typedb.com)
[![Stack Overflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/stackoverflow-typedb-796de3.svg)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/typedb)
[![Stack Overflow](https://img.shields.io/badge/stackoverflow-typeql-3dce8c.svg)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/tagged/typeql)
[![Hosted By: Cloudsmith](https://img.shields.io/badge/OSS%20hosting%20by-cloudsmith-blue?logo=cloudsmith&style=flat)](https://cloudsmith.com)

# Introducing TypeDB

TypeDB is a general-purpose database designed with a new kind of high-level, declarative query language that drastically simplifies handling complex data and logic. TypeDB is built for the performance, maintainability, safety, and scalability needs of modern applications, and is specifically tailored to cloud-based development.

- Get started by [installing TypeDB](https://typedb.com/docs/home/install/overview).
- Explore the basics of TypeDB in our easy [Crash Course](https://typedb.com/docs/home/crash-course).
- Discover more of TypeDB’s unique [features](https://typedb.com/features).
- Master TypeDB with our end-to-end [Learning Course](https://typedb.com/docs/learn/overview).
- Learn more at TypeDB's [Learning Center](https://typedb.com/learn).

> **IMPORTANT NOTE:** TypeDB & TypeQL are in the process of being rewritten in [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org). There will be significant refinement to the language, and minor breaks in backwards compatibility. Learn about the changes on our [roadmap issue on GitHub](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/issues/6764). The biggest change to TypeDB 3.0 will be our storage data structure and architecture that significantly boosts performance. We’re aiming to release 3.0 in the summer this year, along with preliminary benchmarks of TypeDB.

## Polymorphic databases

###  Why TypeDB was built

Data frequently exhibits polymorphic features in the form of inheritance hierarchies and interface dependencies. TypeDB was crafted to solve the inability of current database paradigms to natively express these polymorphic features.

- Relational schemas have [no native capability for modeling polymorphic data](https://typedb.com/philosophy#why-do-we-need-a-polymorphic-database).
- Unstructured databases eliminate the schemas entirely, but this [prevents declarative data retrieval](https://typedb.com/philosophy#why-do-we-need-a-polymorphic-database).
- [ORMs work around the fundamental problem](https://typedb.com/philosophy#why-do-we-need-a-polymorphic-database) by trading off performance.


### Providing full support for polymorphism

<!-- Polymorphism in programming languages and data modeling comes in the form of [interface](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database), [inheritance](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database), and [parametric polymorphism](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database).  -->

In order to fully support polymorphism, a database needs to implement three key components:

- Support for [**polymorphic** **schemas**](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) that can express inheritance hierarchies and interface implementations.
- Implementation of a fully [**variablizable** **query language**](https://typedb.com/features#polymorphic-queries) to support powerful [parametric](https://typedb.com/philosophy#what-defines-a-polymorphic-database) database operations.
- Integration of an [**inference engine**](https://typedb.com/features#strong-type-system) to interpret variables in the semantic context given by the schema.



## The TypeDB database

### The schema

TypeDB schemas are based on a modern type system that natively supports inheritance and interfaces, and follows a [conceptual data modeling](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) approach, in which user-defined types subtype (based on their function) three root types: [entities](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling), [relations](https://typedb.com/features#expressive-relations), and [attributes](https://typedb.com/features#intuitive-attributes).

- *Entities* are independent objects,
- *Relations* depend on their *role* interfaces played by either entities or relations,
- *Attributes* are properties with a value that can be *owned* by entities or relations.

Interface and inheritance for these types can be combined in many ways, resulting in highly expressive ways of modeling data.

```php
define

full-name sub attribute, value string;
id sub attribute, value string;
email sub id;
employee-id sub id;

user sub entity,
    owns full-name,
    owns email @unique,
    plays mentorship:trainee;
employee sub user,
    owns employee-id @key,
    plays mentorship:mentor;

mentorship sub relation,
    relates mentor,
    relates trainee;
```


### The query language

The query language of TypeDB is [TypeQL](https://typedb.com/docs/typeql/overview). The syntax of TypeQL is fully variablizable and provides native support for polymorphic queries. The language is based on [fully declarative and composable](https://typedb.com/features#modern-language) patterns, mirroring the structure of natural language.

```php
match $user isa user,
    has full-name $name,
    has email $email;
# This returns all users of any type

match $user isa employee,
    has full-name $name,
    has email $email,
    has employee-id $id;
# This returns only users who are employees

match $user-type sub user;
$user isa $user-type,
    has full-name $name,
    has email $email;
# This returns all users and their type
```


### The inference engine

Any query in TypeDB is [semantically validated](https://typedb.com/features#strong-type-system) by TypeDB’s inference engine for consistency with the database schema. This prevents invalid schema updates and data inserts before they can affect the integrity of the database.

TypeDB can also work with data that is not physically stored in the database, but instead logically inferred based on user-specified [rules](https://typedb.com/features#symbolic-reasoning). This enables developers to cleanly separate their source data from their application logic, often allowing for complex systems to be described by combinations of simple rules.

```php
define
rule transitive-team-membership:
    when {
        (team: $team-1, member: $team-2) isa team-membership;
        (team: $team-2, member: $member) isa team-membership;
    } then {
        (team: $team-1, member: $member) isa team-membership;
    };

insert
$john isa user, has email "john@vaticle.com";
$eng isa team, has name "Engineering ";
$cloud isa team, has name "Cloud";
(team: $eng, member: $cloud) isa team-membership;
(team: $cloud, member: $john) isa team-membership;

match
$john isa user, has email "john@vaticle.com";
(team: $team, member: $john) isa team-membership;
# This will return both Cloud and Engineering for $team due to the defined rule
```
 

## Effective database engineering

TypeDB breaks down the patchwork of existing database paradigms into three fundamental ingredients: [types](https://typedb.com/features#strong-type-system), [inheritance](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling), and [interfaces](https://typedb.com/features#polymorphic-queries). This provides a unified way of working with data across all database applications, that directly impacts development:

- Make use of full [object model parity](https://typedb.com/#solve-object-relational-mismatch-entirely-within-the-database) when working with OOP
- Ensure [continuous extensibility](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) of your data model
- Work with high-level [logical abstractions](https://typedb.com/features#conceptual-modeling) eliminating the need for physical data modeling
- Let TypeDB's inference engine guarantee [data-consistency](https://typedb.com/#avoid-data-redundancy-and-ensure-data-consistency-in-real-time) at all times
- Write high-clarity code with TypeQL's [near-natural](https://typedb.com/features#modern-language) queries even for the most complex databases
- Unleash the power of [fully declarative and composable](https://typedb.com/features#modern-language) patterns onto your data


## Installation and editions

### TypeDB editions

* [TypeDB Cloud](https://cloud.typedb.com) — multi-cloud DBaaS
* [TypeDB Cloud self-hosted](mailto://sales@vaticle.com) — allows you to deploy TypeDB Cloud in your own environment
* **TypeDB Core** — Open-source edition of TypeDB ← _This repository_

For a comparison of all three editions, see the [Deploy](https://typedb.com/deploy) page on our website.


### Download and run TypeDB Core

You can download TypeDB from the [GitHub Releases](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/releases). 

Check our [Installation guide](https://typedb.com/docs/typedb/2.x/installation) to get started.


### Compiling TypeDB Core from source

> Note: You DO NOT NEED to compile TypeDB from the source if you just want to use TypeDB. See the _"Download and Run 
> TypeDB Core"_ section above.

1. Make sure you have the following dependencies installed on your machine:
   - Java JDK 11 or higher
   - [Bazel 6 or higher](https://bazel.build/install).

2. You can build TypeDB with either one of the following commands, depending on the targeted architecture and 
   Operation system: 

   ```sh
   $ bazel build //:assemble-linux-x86_64-targz
   $ bazel build //:assemble-linux-arm64-targz
   $ bazel build //:assemble-mac-x86_64-zip
   $ bazel build //:assemble-mac-arm64-zip
   $ bazel build //:assemble-windows-x86_64-zip
   ```

   Outputs to: `bazel-bin/`.

3. If you're on a Mac and would like to run any `bazel test` commands, you will need to install:
   - snappy: `brew install snappy`
   - jemalloc: `brew install jemalloc`


## Resources

### Developer resources

- Documentation: https://typedb.com/docs
- Discussion Forum: https://forum.typedb.com/
- Discord Chat Server: https://typedb.com/discord
- Community Projects: https://github.com/typedb-osi


### Useful links

If you want to begin your journey with TypeDB, you can explore the following resources:

* More on TypeDB's [features](https://typedb.com/features)
* In-depth dive into TypeDB's [philosophy](https://typedb.com/philosophy)
* Our [TypeDB quickstart](https://typedb.com/docs/home/quickstart)
* [TypeDB in 25 queries](https://typedb.com/docs/home/25-queries)
* **[TypeQL](https://github.com/vaticle/typeql)**
* **[TypeDB Studio](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb-studio)**


## Contributions

TypeDB and TypeQL are built using various open-source frameworks and technologies throughout its evolution. 
Today TypeDB and TypeQL use
[Speedb](https://www.speedb.io/),
[pest](https://pest.rs/),
[SCIP](https://www.scipopt.org),
[Bazel](https://bazel.build),
[gRPC](https://grpc.io),
[ZeroMQ](https://zeromq.org), 
and [Caffeine](https://github.com/ben-manes/caffeine). 

Thank you!

In the past, TypeDB was enabled by various open-source products and communities that we are hugely thankful to:
[RocksDB](https://rocksdb.org),
[ANTLR](https://www.antlr.org),
[Apache Cassandra](http://cassandra.apache.org), 
[Apache Hadoop](https://hadoop.apache.org), 
[Apache Spark](http://spark.apache.org), 
[Apache TinkerPop](http://tinkerpop.apache.org), 
and [JanusGraph](http://janusgraph.org). 

### Package hosting
Package repository hosting is graciously provided by  [Cloudsmith](https://cloudsmith.com).
Cloudsmith is the only fully hosted, cloud-native, universal package management solution, that
enables your organization to create, store and share packages in any format, to any place, with total
confidence.

## Licensing

This software is developed by [Vaticle](https://vaticle.com/).  
It's released under the Mozilla Public License 2.0 (MPL 2.0).
For license information, please see [LICENSE](https://github.com/vaticle/typedb/blob/master/LICENSE). 

Vaticle also provides a commercial license for TypeDB Cloud self-hosted - get in touch with our team at 
[commercial@vaticle.com](emailto://sales@vaticle.com).

Copyright (C) 2023 Vaticle.
